---
layout: blog-post
title: Viveka
---

## Viveka Is the Insight Knowledge of Discriminating Moments

Yogis and buddhists found that consciousness is not a continuum, but constitutes a series of indivisible temporal units, called moments. [^moments] It is like a movie made up of a series of frames. These moments are transient, leaving to us the illusion that consciousness is continuous. Viveka is the ability of discriminating these moments, realizing that a moment and the following are distinct, and that only after the falling of the preceding will a moment arise. [^viveka]

  [^moments]: For details, see the stanzas from 3.52 to 3.54 of _The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali_, chapter 4 of _A Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma_, and section "Insight Knowledge of Arising and Passing Away" of _Manual of Insight_.

  [^viveka]: Stanza 3.52 of _The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali_ defines viveka and declares the path to viveka:

    > From samyama on the moment and its succession, there is knowledge born of discrimination.

    Here, "samyama" is the combination of concentration, meditation, and samadhi. And the "knowledge born of discrimination" is viveka.

    However, in many commentaries except for that by Vyasa, the discrimination is explained as that discriminating Atman from non-Atman, or Self from non-Self. In fact, in the following stanza (3.53), Patanjali explained that, based on this discrimination, things can be distinguished even though they share the same characters and position. As Heraclitus claimed, one could never step into the same river twice. And in the next stanza (3.55), Patanjali claimed that this ability will lead to the separation of Self and non-Self. So, it is confirmed that it is discriminating moments that is what Patanjali referred to, and that it is the result of this discrimination, instead of the discrimination itself, Self and non-Self are separated.

## Viveka Leads to Superlative Ability of Monitoring Mind

While applying viveka, consciousness is realized not as a place full of objects at the same time, but a series in which there is just one object at each moment. Thus **every** object that appears in consciousness can be realized. So, he who acquires viveka gains the superlative ability of monitoring the mind [^mind].

  [^mind]: We use the word mind as an equivalent of consciousness.

As discussed in a [previous note](2023-05-20-attention.md), the ability of monitoring the mind leads to controlled synaptic plasticity, by which we can plant what we want to cultivate and uproot what we want to eliminate. So, he who acquires viveka gains the ability of shaping his brain at will.

## Practice of Viveka Should Be Gradual and Methodical

Objects are those appearing in the mind. They can be realized by noting. It is very helpful to think of the mind as a "room of awareness", an imagined room with doors through which objects go in and out of the room one by one. In this simile, noting is a gatekeeper. When an object comes into the room, the gatekeeper recognizes seeing as "seeing", hearing as "hearing", moving as "moving", feeling as "feeling", thinking as "thinking", and the like. Interestingly, the gatekeeper is in fact the mind itself, which means, like any other object, the recognition will occupy a moment in the series of moments of consciousness.

So, the practice of viveka is gradually fulfilling the temporal series of objects in the mind with noting, until every moment can be realized. [^fulfill-with-noting] Practitioner shall note what is currently perceived, such as painful feelings and distracting thoughts. If there is nothing conspicuous to note, fulfill the temporal series with noting the rising and falling of abdomen caused by breathing, which is constant and distinct. **Noting shall tightly follow the appearance of the object to be noted; and never shall you note an object which does not appear or has disappeared.** It may be found helpful, especially in the early stage of practice, to label what is noted, not audibly, but in a gentle and relaxed way, using simple daily language like "pain", "thinking", "rising", or "falling". So, with each noting, practitioner realizes what is in the mind in the current moment.

  [^fulfill-with-noting]: When the temporal series of objects in the mind is fulfilled with noting, it will be like

      ⋯ → object A → note object A → object B → note object B → ⋯

When practice is immature, practitioner will find that there are so many objects to be noted that it is difficult to catch up with the speed of the appearances and disappearances. For beginner, it is better to deliberately limit the perceived objects to a minimum. Since distinct objects come from the eyes, ears, bodily sensations, and thoughts, a beginner shall limit his vision or even close his eyes, practice in a quiet environment, and reduce unnecessary bodily movement; when bodily movement becomes inevitable, the whole process shall be performed slowly, and be noted including the intention to move. Mind wandering will naturally reduce its power when noting is consistent. Even though limited, the objects to be noted can still be many, so that you may feel multiple objects appear simultaneously. In this case, labeling any of them is valid; the point is being aware of them when they appear. In addition, some objects are too subtle to be noted accurately. Beginner shall simply omit them, diligently noting what is conspicuous for him.

In the beginning, only coarse objects can be noted. But gradually, noting will become finer and finer; more subtle objects and their indistinguishable order in the temporal series can be realized on their own. When noting becomes fast and swift, more and more objects can be aware of; labeling all of them can be exhausted. In this situation, it is better to drop labels, but simply being aware of what is currently in the mind. [^Mahasi-method]

  [^Mahasi-method]: The method of practice analyzed in this section is consistent with the Mahasi method, which is described in his _Manual of Insight_, especially in its chapter 5. This should not be a surprise, but a confirmation of validity and rationality of the analysis here.

## References

1. _The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali_ by Christopher Chapple, Yogi Ananda Viraj. ISBN: 8170302447.
2. _A Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma_ by Bhikkhu Bodhi. ISBN: 1928706029.
3. _Manual of Insight_ by Mahasi Sayadaw. ISBN: 9781614292777.

---
